thank you all for coming excited to be
here we're here to talk to you all about
go to market design which we firmly
believe is a far too often overlooked
yet critical driver of the health of any
SAS business and this particular talk is
portrayed through the lens of the magic
number which as we all know is a top one
or two metric SAS metric for any
business so excited to get into it I'm
reiv I'm a partner at Sapphire Ventures
on the investment team I've been
investing for over a dozen years now
across a few dozen companies been
fortunate to partner with companies like
monday.com V Outreach uh flowcast six
sense and a whole host of others over
the years and I have a particular
passion I would say for working with
management teams and Founders from that
510 million ARR scale to hundreds of of
AR and particularly around go to market
and the iterations around go to market
different motions different metrics
different organizations and the ups and
downs across it all that's what inspired
a lot of this particular topic I'll
introduce myself as well current sing
partner at Sapphire Ventures I run our
Revenue Excellence practice and manage
curate our broader goto Market Community
before Sapphire I was an inced go to
market strategy operations leader for
large B2B technology companies most
recently at proor and before that at
Cloud era and arcite in all three
instances I was responsible for and help
participate in building what I would
call sustainable durable and efficient
go to market organization so this topic
that we'll cover with you folks today
near dear to my heart as well thanks
Karen I'm Jane I am a vice president
here on the investment team at sappire
Adventures I've been investing for a
little over five years now and have also
had the fortune to work with and also
learn from a ton of amazing to be SAS
companies so over the last couple of
years we have seen a significant drop in
go to market efficiency by efficiency we
are specifically referring to the net
magic number which is calculated as
total net new ARR divided by total sales
and marketing stun in a given time
period and we've seen this metric drop
precipitously across both public SAS
companies as well as private companies
that we have observed in our own
portfolio and just to give you a sense
of magnetude on this change we can see
here that the Media Net magic number for
public SAS companies has dropped from 7x
earlier last year to 3x in the most
recent quarter just to put this 3x in
perspective for all of you this means
that you are spending $3 in sales and
marketing to generate every $1 in that
new ARR and we're here today to not only
talk to you about why we think this
decline happened but also more
importantly one less talk about way that
you can use to double your magic number
without having to reinvent the wheel or
just cross your fingers for better quota
attainment but before we get there let's
just take a step back and talk about why
the magic number is an important metric
so the magic number is a key measure of
Financial Health for any SAS company and
it has really significant implications
for a company's ability to not only
drive profits but also its ability to
drive growth so let's just bring this to
light with an illustrative example we
have here say you have a mature B2B SAS
company doing $650 million in Gaff
revenue and it's growing 30%
year-over-year but operating with a0 4X
magic number and say you back into the
sales and marketing expense from magic
number and assume that the R&D and GNA
expenses AR around similar levels as
public stas comps at similar scale what
you end up with is actually quite an
unprofitable business operating with -
25% operating margin despite having
significant Revenue scale at above 600
million in revenue and what does this
mean it means if you want to reach Break
Even you will have to cut that growth
down by half down to
15% or if you had a magic number of 7x
in this you would already be a break
even so this just goes to show that
efficiency is what gives you the ability
to double your growth and grow faster
and all of this also goes to paint the
picture that having a low magic number
really diminishes your ability to not
only drive profits but also your ability
to drive growth and it makes that path
to profitability just that much more
challenging and I think we all know that
profit is what drives shareholder value
in the long run thank you Jane now that
Jane helped to reground us and refresh
Us in the importance of magic number
let's talk about why what's driving that
deterioration number one I think most of
us know it and most of us feel it I feel
it in board meetings it's just hard out
there to sell most software maybe
there's some verticals or some motions
that are still working but by and large
it's hard and that's really reflected in
a decline in the core AE sales
attainment it's interesting I was just
reviewing in prep ation for this a lot
of the board decks coming out of Q2 just
the quarter that just passed comparing
the sales AE sales attainment to Q2 of
21 and Q2 of this year was roughly at
60% for some of the best performing
private SAS companies that same number
was 90% in Q2 of 21 that's about a
one-third decline in AE sales attainment
again macro clearly has an impact on
this we all hope the demand environment
will soften up and I think it will one
year from now and will boost back up but
the point here is I think that's just
one reason and there is something still
missing to the equation of what's
driving this decline in magic number
because as I just mentioned there's two
factors one the decline in sales
efficiency has been
60% but the decline in Quota attainment
we think is roughly 30% there's still a
big gap two I've had three conversations
with CEOs that I work with talking about
second half of the Year planning and
next year budgeting and we were modeling
some uptick ENT attainment hoping we
would get back to 85% attainment
assuming healthy Ram times and quotas
across your sort of sales organization
is pretty darn good I would be pretty
excited if you could perform at 85%
anyone consistently I saw that input and
then I saw the output of these models
and I'm like wait why are we still at
a4x Magic Number there's something
disconnected I would have expected a 08
or 0.9 something close to the 1X that
everyone dreams of that's top desile of
companies but there was something a
massive disconnect that still leaves a
reason number two which got us to really
thinking and let us to the next slide
which is what we really are missing is
this go to market design point this
ability to holistically look at your go
to market organization Beyond just the
AES realize that of course there's so
many other folks in a go to market
organization and pockets of spend and
then most importantly we've spent a lot
of time looking at the data the board
deck surveying The Operators at best
in-class companies over time and what
we've noticed is 5 to seven years ago
this composition of the go to market
team the ratios of this individual to
that individual has changed dramatically
over the last 5 seven years i s saw it
start to happen in 2018 and now I think
there is some re-engineering to go back
because the sales attainment hasn't kept
up with that shift so I'll let him get
into the data and tell you exactly what
that means and how that translates to
numbers
I on I'm going to go a little bit deeper
on the same topic so we do we have a
belief that go to market or design and
more specifically tuning the composition
of your goom Market or is probably one
of the most meaningful levers you can
pull on right now and has massive
implications to the success of your
business and we were able to go in and
look at around five to seven years worth
of data trended data to see if we could
glean any observations or learnings
about how go to market efficiency has
been changing so what's happening
practically out there we went out a slew
of operators in our network from
companies like moft New Relic Pro Force
Snowflake and others and got their
perspective effectively pressure tested
some of the things we were hearing
feeling sensing to come together and
have a perspective on how go to market
efficiency has been involving so let's
start with the numbers this is what
jumped out to us when we looked at our
board decks and some of the trends that
we've been seeing that goto Market
composition has changed pretty
significantly over the last five plus
years most specifically we're seeing
that the percentage of investment that
we've made against quarter caring
sellers has dropped so back in 2018 on
average what we were seeing was around
30% of go to market investment was going
to quot carrying sellers now that number
is actually closer to 10% that's a
pretty meaningful and significant change
in composition and something that I know
has ramifications to what we were
talking about earlier which is magic
number and overall efficiency so we know
there's a challenge here and when we saw
this number and we saw this data our
immediate reaction was why did this
happen in the first place Rie alluded to
some of it but I think there's more
Beyond here's our belief our belief is
that there's external think macro Advan
macro changes that have ultimately
informed and influenced how company
leaders are thinking about investing in
their go to market let me get a little
more specific as to what I mean there so
for starters I think we all know felt to
have seen the zero interest rate free
money environment in the years past what
that meant tangibly and we see this now
from the BC perspective I certainly do
is that led to an abundance of capital
that needed to be deployed out right BCS
did exactly that which has led to a
proliferation of SAS companies in other
words a highly competitive environment I
suspect a lot of the operators in the
room have felt that in the companies
that they've been a part of I see some
hands raising I was one of those and I
felt the same too so on one hand we have
we've seen this increase in uh
competitive environment
then we've also felt and seen that
growth rates haven't slowed down or
hadn't slowed down back then there was
some aggressive targets we were all
achieving so knowing those two things
together and having that additional
Capital we saw some of the behavior
Trends change across our portfolio and
some of these things should make sense
for starters investing ahead of growth
it's something I did at Pro for because
we had such aggressive Target so how do
we set ourselves up not just for now but
for one year from now what are we
investing in and certainly that's a
healthy Behavior but what we've also
seen both in the data as well as in our
conversations is that there was an
additional incremental investment
against what I call supporting resources
resources around the entire go to market
engine that ultimately should drive up
seller productivity think sales
Engineers SDR csms Etc and the thesis is
pretty straightforward right it's
something that I also was involved in
past lives which is that if you allow
for more
specialization across the go to market
engine and really help sellers focus on
the main thing which is closing deals in
theory what should that do that should
drive up productivity that should lead
to more pipeline generation better
conversion and ultimately help hit the
targets that we have in place in
practice that's not what's happening
we're seeing a drop in seller attainment
in fact we went in and spoke with a lot
of The Operators a lot of the cro within
our portfolio and they all alluded to
the same thing that this in these
Investments while it was the right
decision in some way shap perform or the
premise was correct have actually led to
a diffusion of responsibility which has
led to a lack of ownership in other
words nobody's quarterbacking the full
go to market engine the same way as they
were before this has some pretty sizable
implications and we're going to go into
some scenarios that explain that but the
moment that we recognized the challenge
at hand which is the composition of go
to market is changing we understood why
it was happening in the first place we
packaged all that up and went back to
our go to market community and said to
the operators in our Network we know
there's a challenge here the challenge
is that we need to rethink go to market
or design especially in this day how
should we think about it so consider a
complete Blank Slate forget what you're
doing today forget what you've seen tell
me what good and great would look like
if you had the chance to start from a
new and we captured all that information
through a survey through conversation
and put it together here's what we saw
this is very much more sort of SLG
Centric than plg so if you're more sales
Le versus product Le is a little bit of
a different animal when it comes to the
ratios but directionally this is what
they all came back with as what good and
great looks like here's the observation
we had when we looked at the data
actually the way that operators think
about what good best practice go to
market ORS look like actually are not
reflective of what we see in board decks
and in or design today in fact this is
far more similar to what we've seen in
2018 so by no means am I suggesting we
need to turn back and look at what 2018
is and was and use that to reflect of
what it needs to be today it's more the
observation that great operators in our
community understand the importance of a
balanced go to market organization and
the importance of the efficiency gains
that you get from that so with that I do
want to take a step back because this is
to me a really important concept and the
best way I think we can illustrate it is
actually through scenarios and examples
and so I'm going to actually pass it
over to Jane now and she's going to go
through a few of these to give you a
sense of the impact of word design on
your overall Company Success
thanks curan um so let me just walk all
of you through an illustrative example
of how go to market team were typically
designed back in the day say 5 to 10
years ago let's say you have a business
with 36 quota carrying reps each with a
million doll quotas so altogether you're
supporting a booking School of 30
million for the year for these 36
sellers what we used to see in terms of
the composition of the various
supporting roles for the sellers looks
something like a 3 to1 AE to SDR ratio a
3:1 a to se
ratio a 3 million book of business size
per CSM and a 10 to1 revops the revenue
FTE ratio and under this specific go to
market composition let's say we assume
85% quota ATT pay with some reasonable
assumptions around churn what we're
looking at is an aggregate sales and
marketing spend of $24 million against
20 million in net newal AR and this
gives us a magic number of
a6x which is actually pretty healthy
based on a lot of the survey data we
have seen published out there and in
fact it's actually pretty close to the
historic iCal top cortile magic number
of trends of around
1X now let's fast forward and look at
how these teams are designed today and
what this composition of different roles
and how that's really drastically
changed over the years for the same 36
sellers what we're seeing is a e to S
ratio closer to 1 to one and this all
came from a fair attempt to boost
pipeline
generation and take prospecting
responsibility off the sellers for se
you know we're seeing a similar lower e
to se ratio now closer to two to one as
companies now claim they have a much
more technical sale and they need much
more Technical
Resources on top of that with the
increased focus on driving up retention
and expansion we're now also looking at
much bigger CSM teams with much smaller
book of business sizes and this similar
Trend also holds true for marketing and
revops and all in all all of this
happened as part of a very sincere
effort to drive up seller productivity
however what you end up with is a
significantly different go to market
Lord one that has so many more
supporting roles with so much higher
expenses for the exact same number of
sellers for the ex same bookings Target
and not
surprisingly this change in good Market
or composition has some pretty
significant impact on your goto market
efficiency in fact if we want to go back
to the same level of efficiency that we
had from Scenario one what we have to do
now under today's go to market
competition is to increase sales quota
attainment to
120% across the board
so just let that one sink in by the way
I would have loved to have 120%
attainment never happened for me I think
those scenarios are really interesting I
think illustrative of the point that
we're making in fact when you put the
two things right two scenarios right
next to each other it's even more
evident the challenge that we're facing
same quota capacity in both scenarios
almost double the spend and that is
certainly untenable and that is
effectively what we want to speak to
today is that there needs to be a
rethinking around go to market or design
because that has massive imp
implications across your
organization and in particular we have a
belief that sellers need to come and
become right at the center of the go to
market engine once again over
specialization or specialization in some
ways can be a very healthy exercise but
we still need somebody quarterbacking
the entire initiative to make sure that
they can understand how these different
roles work together how they hand up we
can make that shift and we'll speak a
littleit bit more on the how in a moment
and we have the mindset of having a more
balanced go to market or I think you can
set yourself up for what I think is the
most important thing right now which is
a durable Growth Company a company that
can stand and withstand the headwinds
that we're all facing and feeling today
so with that we want to give you a
little something to chew on as you go
ahead as look forward in your go to
market organizations how to think about
resetting or restructuring or
recomposing your organization there's
some guiding principles we'd suggest I
do want to start by saying that and
we've seen a little bit of this when you
see that efficiency metric and it hits
you right in the face the immediate
reaction for some companies is hey we
got to cut spend we're here to tell you
that's not the goal it's not to
indiscriminately cut spend but rather to
rethink and recompose the spend that you
have we spoke to this with a magic
number slide at the beginning as well
which is that if you can spend
effectively and in a balanced fashion
you actually can drive up growth in your
business as well while maintaining that
cost efficiency so that is what we're
advocating for now how do you do that
for me there's three primary guiding
principles and by the way there's
probably more than this these are the
ones we're most passionate about so
number one be customer Centric it's a
lot harder to have roll redundancies and
four handoffs if you start first with
the customer in mind and we do this I do
this a little bit with our portfolio
companies as well map your customers
journey by phase and stage and then look
at that to understand what the objective
is for the customer by the pH and stage
of their Journey with you very quickly
and very easily you can find out exactly
what it is you need to invest in from a
go to market standpoint and where you
may in fact have roll redundancy so
start with customer first secondly look
at the full go to market picture if
there's one thing you should glean from
today is that looking at go to market
com comprehensively is the approach to
take so I'll give you an example we have
a lot of folks talk about quota to OT
ratios being 4 to 7x things to that
effect this Fair we should consider
things like that but what about quota to
full pod cost all the resources that are
being supporting are supporting the
revenue generation we're talking about
consider that as a benchmark as a GU
guard rail for you as you can build out
a go to market or the full go to market
picture and then finally Benchmark and
iterate so benchmarks to me are the
starting point not the ending point of a
conversation they give you the
directional of when you're out of the
swim Lanes when You' maybe off the
reservation use those to start
conversations internally leverage those
other two guiding principles to see if
there's a good reason why you may be out
of the benchmarks or if there isn't how
do you want to tune and iterate which
brings me to that point which is that go
tomarket org design is not a conceptual
exercise it's a people Centric exercise
so we have to be mindful about how we
make this progression and transformation
take the time tune iterate and continue
to do so until you get to healthier
Place ultimately we think that if you
can look at your go to market or rethink
it assess it pressure test the
composition and make sure you're
following some of the guiding principles
that we've set here you have the
opportunity to build that durable growth
organization to build a little bit more
consistency in your organ help it drive
success